----
Notes Contemplate
The Gift of Fear Survival Signals that Protect Us from Violence
Gavin de Becker 1997

The Blue And Brown Books
Lugwig Wittgenstein

The Gulag Archipelago
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn

<!-- Body Language of someone not being truthful -->
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lvxJoUuG018&t=1450s

Moby Dick 
Herman Melville

Thinking Fast and Slow
Daniel Kahneman
----

----
Body Language of someone not being truthful
  Eye Blocking (typically while speaking or listening)
   - indicates desire for privacy
   - primitive form of hiding internal struggles
  Shoulder Shrugging
   - indicates uncertainty
   - can be very slight in movement
  Lip Locking (lips being hidden w/i mouth)
   - indicates dislike for what is being heard or said
----

----
Survival Signals
 - signs or behaviors that should indicate danger is imminent
 - typically with regards to strangers
 
 (1) Forced Teaming: an effective way to est. a premature trust 
     typically thought the use of the pronoun "we".  Is not 
     coincidence but is intentional and direct
 (2) Charm and Niceness: charm should be considered a verb not 
     a trait.  Reflect as, "this person is attempting to charm me"
     and not as, "this person is so charming". Niceness does not
     equal goodness.
 (3) Too Many Details: signals need for additional support and is 
     given by a perp to mentally support what they know is bullshit.
     Also helps to confuse the obvious context of an interaction.
 (4) Typecasting: an label intended as an slight insult that is 
     easily refuted.  It should be met with stone-cold silence.
 (5) Loan Sharking: offering help with intent to place someone in
     a preceived debt making it more difficult for them to decline 
     further incursion.
 (6) Unsolicited Promise: most reliable in its obviousness, an 
     attempt to build trust where none was ever asked.  One should
     always be suspicious of this one.
 (7) Ignoring "No":  declining to hear, "no" is a signal that someone
     is either seeking control or refusing to relinquish it.
----

----
Other names for intuition
 Nagging feeling
 Persistent thought
 Humor 
 Wonder
 Anxiety
 Curiosity
 Hunch
 Gut feeling
 Doubt
 Hesitation
 Suspicion
 Apprehension
 Fear
----

----
The Blue And Brown Books
We are looking for the use of a sign, but we look for it as though it 
were an object co-existing with the sign.

The thing to do in such cases is always to look how the words 
in question are actually used in our language.  We are in all such cases
thinking of a use different from that which our ordinary language makes 
of the words.  When something seems queer about the grammar of our words, 
it is because we are alternately tempted to use a word in several different ways.
And it is particularly difficult to discover that an assertion which the 
metaphysician makes expresses discontentment with our grammar when the words 
of this assertion can also be used to state a fact of experience. (pg 57-58)

One can defend common sense against the attacks of philosophers only by 
solving their puzzles, i.e., by curing them of the temptation to attack common 
sense; not by restating the views of common sense.

The meaning of a phrase for us is characterized by the use we make of it. The
meaning is not a mental accompaniment to the expression. (61)

I want to play chess, and a man gives the white king a paper crown, leaving the 
use of the piece unaltered, but telling me that the crown has a meaning to him
in the game, which he can't express by rules.  I say: "as long as it doesn't 
alter the use of the piece, it hasn't what I call a meaning".(61)

Imagine a language in which, instead of "I found nobody in the room", one said
"I found Mr. Nobody in the room".  Imagine the philosophical problems which 
would arise out of such a convention.  Some philosophers brought up in this 
language would probably feel they didn't like the similarity of the expressions
"Mr. Nobody" and "Mr. Smith". (69)

The use of a word in practice is its meaning. (69)

"I never know what the other really means by 'brown' or what he really sees 
when he (truthfully) says the the sees a brown object".  We could propose to 
one who says this to use two different words instead of one word "brown"; 
one word for his particular impression, the other word with that meaning which
other people besides himself can understand as well. (72-73)

Mental images of colours, shapes, sounds, etc., etc., which play a role 
in communication by means of language we put in the same category with patches 
of colour actually seens, sounds heard. (89)
----

----
The Gulag Archipelago

And the only solution to this would be that the meaning of earthly existence lies 
not, as we have grown used to thinking, in prospering, but ... the development of 
the soul.  From that point of view our torturers have been punished most horribly of
 all: they are turning into swine, they are departing downward from humanity.  
 From that point of view punishment is inflicted on those whose 
 development ... holds out hope.(311)
 
Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line separating good and evil passes 
not through states, nor between classes, nor between political parties either 
- but right through every human heart - and through all human hearts.  This 
line shifts.  Inside us, it oscillates with the years.  And even within hearts 
overwhelmed by evil, one small bridgehead of good is retained.  And even in 
the best of all hearts, there remains ... an unuprooted small corner of evil. (312)

You can pray feely
But just so God alone can hear. (23)

"Don't ever be the first to stop applauding!" (28)

From the moment you go to prison you must put your cozy past firmly behind you. (63)

Those who have condemned many others to be shot often wilt at the prospect of their own death. (126)

How could it be anything but hard!  It was more than the human heart could 
bear: to fall beneath the beloved ax- then have to justify its wisdom.  But 
that is the price a man pays for entrusting his God-given soul to human dogma. (243)

Do a similarity of paths in life and a similarity of situations give rise to 
a similarity in characters?  As a general thing it doesn't.  For people with 
strong minds and spirits of their own it does not.  They have their own solutions, 
their own special traits, and they can be very surprising. (283)

But it did not happen!  People died by the hundreds of thousands and millions, driven, 
it would seem, to the extremity of extremities - but for some reason there were 
no suicides!  Condemned to a misshapen existence, to waste away from starvation, 
to exhaustion from labor - they did not put an end to themselves!  And thinking the 
whole thing over, I found that proof to be the stronger.  A suicide is always a bankrupt, 
always a human being in a blind alley, a human being who has gambled his life and lost 
and is without the will to continue the struggle.  If these millions of helpless and 
pitiful vermin still did not put an end to themselves - this meant some kind of invincible 
feeling was alive inside them.  Some very powerful idea. (301)

A person who is not inwardly prepared for the use of violence against him is 
always weaker than the person committing the violence. (10)
----

----
 By this, he seemed to mean, not only that the most reliable and useful courage was 
 that which arises from the fair estimation of the encountered peril, but that an 
 utterly fearless man is a far more dangerous comrade than a coward. 
 Chapter 26
 
 The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniac incarnation of all those malicious 
 agencies which some deep men feel eating in them, till they are left living on with 
 half a heart and half a lung. That intangible malignity which has been from the beginning; 
 to whose dominion even the modern Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds; which the 
 ancient Ophites of the east reverenced in their statue devil;—Ahab did not fall down and 
 worship it like them; but deliriously transferring its idea to the abhorred white whale, 
 he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it. All that most maddens and torments; all that 
 stirs up the lees of things; all truth with malice in it; all that cracks the sinews and 
 cakes the brain; all the subtle demonisms of life and thought; all evil, to crazy Ahab, 
 were visibly personified, and made practically assailable in Moby Dick. He piled upon the 
 whale’s white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate felt by his whole race from 
 Adam down; and then, as if his chest had been a mortar, he burst his hot heart’s shell 
 upon it. 
 Chapter 41
 
 speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast 
 dived the deepest. That head upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this 
 world’s foundations. Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors 
 rot; where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of millions of 
 the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most familiar home. Thou hast 
 been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by many a sailor’s side, where sleepless 
 mothers would give their lives to lay them down. Thou saw'st the locked lovers when leaping 
 from their flaming ship; heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each 
 other, when heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw'st the murdered mate when tossed by pirates 
 from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of the insatiate maw; and 
 his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift lightnings shivered the neighboring ship 
 that would have borne a righteous husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast 
 seen enough to split the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is 
 thine!  
 Chapter 70
 
 Towards thee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with 
 thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee; for hate's sake I spit my last breath at thee.
 Chapter 135
 ----
 
----
- Law of Small Numbers:  when a conclusion is drawn for too-small a sample
  - can mean a bias based on one-or-two personal encounters
  - in probability, should be noticed that results from one sample are different from the next 

- Anchoring Effect: a psychological phenomena where a person is given a numerical value  to 
  some unknown quantity prior to be asked to estimate it.  The subsequent estimate, by the person,
  will always stay near the given value.
  - The mind interprets the given value as only 'mostly' correct, it only needs to be slightly 
    adjusted up or down.
    
- Availability Heuristic: when a person is asked to estimate the likelihood of something
  the person who is able to easily recall such an occurrence from memory will always estimate 
  a higher numerical value.
  
- Affect Heuristic: an instance of substitution where its easier to answer, 
  "how do I feel about such-and-such" than it is to answer, "what do I think about such-and-such"
  - an unwillingness to consider complexity which requires trade-offs and compromise
  - easily swayed by trivial details
  - inadequately sensitive to differences between low and negligibly low probabilities
  
- Availability Cascade: media reports of relative minor event leads to public panic.
   - is an iterative social process 
   1. is a media report of some risk 
   2. stirs emotion in some segment of the public
   3. repeat at step one with more
   
- Small Risk Effect: mental phenomena where small risks are either ignored or given far to much

- Representativeness Heuristic: an instance of substitution where it is easier to imagine some
  mental stage-play then to deal with numbers
  - a person is substituted for an easily generated mental impression
  - the mental impression is then the actor on a stage
  - the answer is then given as, "how plausible is this play?"
  - this heuristic DOES produce better results than chance guess
  
- "We consider it morally desirable for base rates to be treated as statistical 
   facts about the group rather than as presumptive facts about individuals."
   Chp 16
   
- Regression to the Mean: a poor performance is very likely to be followed by an 
  improvement regardless
  
- Loss Aversion: the concept that losing hurts more than winning excites
  
- Endowment Effect: a person will value something more once they have attained it.
  - example being Super Bowl tickets a buyer will pay up to $500 to get but won't sell
    for $3000+
    
- Possibility Effect: a person will consider the manifestation of a 
  possibility (e.g. 0% chance to 1%) much higher than an identical increase
  beyond nothing (e.g. 37% to 38% - who cares)
  
- Certainty Effect: like the above only on the other end, the value of certainty 
  is much higher than an identical increase 
  elsewhere (e.g. 37% to 38% compared to 99% to 100%)
  
- Denominator Neglect: when the numerator is given as a mental narrative the 
  denominator is often neglected and poor decisions result
  
- Sunk Cost Fallacy: not knowing that you have to sell a loser
----

----
What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?
 - William Shakespeare, The Rape of Lucrece
----